[WIP] Getting Started with Characters Guide (#1338)
nucypher/nucypher: docs/source/guides/quickstart.md

# NuCypher Quickstart

> ## A Note about Side-Channels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## A Note about Side Channels
```

For consistency

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

> The NuCypher network does not store your application's data; Instead - it manages access *to* your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The NuCypher network does not store or handle an application's data; instead - it manages access *to* application data
```

> The NuCypher network does not store or handle an application's data; instead - it manages access *to* application data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NuCypher network does not store or handle an application's data; instead - it manages access *to* application data.
```

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

> application's data. Management of encrypted secrets and public keys is highly application-specific - 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Management of encrypted secrets and public keys tends to be highly domain-specific. In other words, the surrounding architecture will vary greatly depending on the throughput, sensitivity and sharing cadence of the data in question, to name but a few influencing factors.
```

> In general, nucypher needs to be integrated with a storage or transport layer to function properly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In all cases however, NuCypher must be integrated with a storage and transport layer in order to function properly.
```

> Along with the transport of ciphertext, the application also needs to include 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Along with the transport of ciphertexts, the application also needs to include 
```

> Along with the transport of ciphertext, the application also needs to include 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Along with the transport of ciphertexts, the application also needs to include 
```

facilities for several other pieces of cryptographic material, specifically, channels

> for Alice and Bob to discover each-others public keys, as well as a way to provide policy public keys 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for Alice and Bob to discover each other's public keys, as well as a way to provide the policy's public key 
```

to Bob and Enrico.
 
##### Side Channel Data:
  - Secrets:
    - Message Kits (Ciphertext)
    - Labels
  - Identities:
    - Alice Verifying Key
    - Bob Encrypting Key
    - Bob Verifying Key
  - Policies:
    - Policy Encrypting Key 

## Connecting to the NuCypher Network

### Running an Ethereum Node

> Operation of nucypher cryptological characters `Alice`, `Bob`, and `Ursula` require

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operation of NuCypher cryptological characters [`Alice`, `Bob`, `Ursula`] requires
```

> a running ethereum node and wallet (We recommend Geth).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a running Ethereum node and wallet (we recommend Geth).
```

> a running Ethereum node and wallet (we recommend Geth).

Reviewer: Do we truly recommend running a Geth node if you're just an Alice or Bob? That seems very heavyweight.

Author: What other suggestion can we make?

To run a Goerli connected Geth node:
```bash

> $ geth --goerl

Reviewer 3: Can mention `--syncmode light` option. It's not 100% stable on goerli, but it's a life savior when one uses a mobile connection (or shitty hackathon internet if it is such)

Reviewer 3: Hmm, looks like `--syncmode light` doesn't work because client's response it too slow (more than our 5 s)

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

```

### Provider URI

Nucypher uses the node's IPC-File to communicate, specified by `provider_uri`.
By default in ubuntu, the path is `~/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc` - This path
will also be logged to the geth-running console on startup. 

### Ursula: Untrusted Re-Encryption Proxies

When initializing an `Alice`, `Bob`, or `Ursula`, an initial "Stranger-`Ursula`" is needed to perform 
the role of a `Teacher`, or "seednode".  The `known_nodes` will inform your character of all of the nodes
they know about network-wide, then kick-off the automated node-discovery loop.

> Stranger `Ursula`s can be created by invoking the `from_seed_and_stake_info` method, then a `list` of `known_nodes`

Reviewer 2: I would swap this around so you first instruct users how to invoke `Stranger-Ursula` then explain what the `known-nodes` do.

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

can be passed into any `Character`'s init:
```python
from nucypher.characters.lawful import Ursula, Alice

> ursula = Ursula.from_seed_and_stake_info(seed_uri=<URI>)  # ie. https://0.0.0.0:9151

Reviewer 3: `federated_only=False` is a required argument here

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

> another_ursula = Ursula.from_seed_and_stake_info(seed_uri=<URI>)

Reviewer 3: Besides. Shouldn't we provide a _real working url_ rather than `0.0.0.0` in the guide?

Author: Im holding my breath a bit here for some DNS names :sweat_smile:

> alice = Alice(checksum_address='0xdeadbeef',

Reviewer 3: Should we say, where does the `'0xdeadbeef'` come from?

Reviewer 3: Could mention, how to generate it in geth

Reviewer 3: A hint how to get a checksum address:
```
$ geth attach ~/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc
> eth.accounts
["0x287a817426dd1ae78ea23e9918e2273b6733a43d", "0xc080708026a3a280894365efd51bb64521c45147"]
> web3.toChecksumAddress(eth.accounts[0])
"0x287A817426DD1AE78ea23e9918e2273b6733a43D"
```

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

> alice = Alice(checksum_address='0xdeadbeef',

Reviewer 3: Ok, here's how initializing Alice actually works:
```
from nucypher.blockchain.eth.registry import InMemoryContractRegistry
from nucypher.blockchain.eth.interfaces import BlockchainInterfaceFactory

registry = InMemoryContractRegistry.from_latest_publication('goerli')
BlockchainInterfaceFactory.initialize_interface(provider_uri='file:///home/michwill/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc')

alice = Alice(checksum_address='0x287A817426DD1AE78ea23e9918e2273b6733a43D', known_nodes=[ursula], registry=registry)
```

Reviewer 3: Ok, need a reactor. Now Alice learns

Reviewer 3: And another way to produce (persistent) Alice or any other character:
```python
from nucypher.config.characters import AliceConfiguration
alice_config = AliceConfiguration(config_root='/home/michwill/tmp/alice', known_nodes={ursula}, start_learning_now=False, federated_only=False, checksum_address='0x287A817426DD1AE78ea23e9918e2273b6733a43D', provider_uri='file:///home/michwill/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc')
alice_config.initialize(password='test' * 4)
alice_config.keyring.unlock(password='test' * 4)
alice = alice_config.produce()
alice.start_learning_loop()
...
```

Reviewer 3: We can mention that if you want to produce a persistent character, you need to create it from configuration, and have the relevant guide up. I think, that's what you wanted to do?

>               provider_uri=<PROVIDER URI>,

Reviewer 3: Let's put a more real provider URI. Such as `'file:///home/<username>/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc'`

Reviewer 3: Btw Alice doesn't have the keywork argument `provider_uri`

Reviewer 3: Ok, instead of specifying the `provider_uri` here (which doesn't work), we need to do:
```
from nucypher.blockchain.eth.interfaces import BlockchainInterfaceFactory
BlockchainInterfaceFactory.initialize_interface(provider_uri='file:///home/<username>/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc')
```

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

>               known_nodes=[ursula, another_ursula])

Reviewer 3: Initializing a non-federated Alice fails for me: need to pass a registry:
```
ValueError: Pass either federated only or registry for is_me Characters.                                   Got 'False' and 'None'.
```

Reviewer 3: Need to do something like:
```
from nucypher.blockchain.eth.registry import InMemoryContractRegistry
registry = InMemoryContractRegistry.from_latest_publication('goerli')
```

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

```

## Alice: Grant Access to a Secret

```python
from nucypher.characters.lawful import Alice, Bob, Ursula

# Application Side-Channel
# --------------------------
# bob_encrypting_key = <Side Channel>
# bob_verifying_key = <Side Channel>

ursula = Ursula.from_seed_and_stake_info(seed_uri='https://0.0.0.0:9151')
alice = Alice(checksum_address='0xdeadbeef', 
              provider_uri=<PROVIDER URI>,
              known_nodes=[ursula])

> bob = Bob.from_public_keys(verifying_key=bob_verifying_key, encrypting_key=bob_encrypting_key)

Reviewer 3: I think, we need to tell how to create Bob before this. Otherwise, how would we find Bob's public keys?

Reviewer 3: ```python
from umbral.keys import UmbralPublicKey
bob = Bob.from_public_keys(
    verifying_key=UmbralPublicKey.from_hex(verifying_key_hex),
    encryption_key_hex=UmbralPublicKey.from_hex(encryption_key_hex))
```

Reviewer 3: Note! It's `encrypting_key`, but Bob doesn't fail when specifying a wrong kwarg (e.g. `encryption_key`) at creation time.

Author: Do you think we want to include side channel operations in this document?

Reviewer 3: Well, I think, you'd need some as a bare minimum for a working demo

Author: Yeah, perhaps this is a good direction to go in - However, I am not necessarily going for a "demo" as much as I am trying to provide a technical starting place, which leads to many deeper documents.

Given the "Note about Side Channels" at the top of this document ( which  in my opinion is no longer properly regarded as a "quickstart", rather a "Getting Started ..."-style guide ) I am trying to deliberately exclude information used in side channels, and direct the reader's attention towards the Character.

Reviewer 3: Sure... I mean, we could exclude the aspects of serializing/deserializing keys and pass just `...public_key(SomePower)` if that makes things easier. But we need the public key from _somewhere_ (and I don't think we ever want a guide which cannot work)

Author: > I don't think we ever want a guide which cannot work

From the perspective a "demo" or "comprehensive step by step" I agree - but I feel that my original motivation behind this PR will be lost by including side channel serialization.

Author: Another thought - I dont want to suggest that all side channels use hex even though our CLI uses hex to display keys in the console, the implementation of a dApp's side channel might have another encoding and serialization.

Reviewer 3: Oh, that's true.
How about casting `bytes()` on public keys and passing the same bytes as arguments (because we do accept bytes)? Sounds portable and compact at the same time

```

```python
from datetime import datetime, timedelta

#
# Grant
#

> expiration = datetime.now() + timedelta(days=5)  # Five days from now.

Reviewer 4: our tests have been using the following
```
policy_end_datetime = maya.now() + datetime.timedelta(days=5)
```
Can either `datetime` or `maya` be used?

Reviewer 3: Good point. I've seen a few places where we rely on expiration being `maya`!
I think, it's better to write `maya` here, but do type conversion in our code so that datetime can be passed instead.

Reviewer 3: To be fair, indeed, currently datetime objects will not work. I think it needs to be changed (e.g. we should convert to maya internally). But for the sake of the guide, let's write maya

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

policy = alice.grant(bob,
                     label=b'my-secret-stuff',
                     m=2, n=3,

>                      expiration=expiration)

Reviewer 3: `, value=10 ** 16 // (5 * 3) * (5 * 3)`
(making it a product of `n * days`)

Author: Hmm - How can I represent this here?

> policy_encrypting_key = policy.public_key

Reviewer 3: Probably can mention `.hex()`

```

Note that Alice can get the public key even before creating the policy.

> From this moment on, any Data Source (Enrico) that knows the public key

Reviewer 2: I'd move this introduction into the Enrico section below

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

can encrypt data originally intended for Alice, but can be shared with
any Bob that Alice grants access.

`policy_pubkey = alice.get_policy_encrypting_key_from_label(label)`

## Enrico: Encrypt a Secret

```python
from nucypher.characters.lawful import Enrico

# Application Side-Channel
# --------------------------
# policy_encrypting_key = <Side Channel>

enrico = Enrico(policy_encrypting_key=policy_encrypting_key)

> ciphertext = enrico.encrypt_message(message=b'Peace at dawn.')

Reviewer 3: `ciphertext, signature = `?

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

```

## Bob: Decrypt a Secret

```python
from nucypher.characters.lawful import Alice, Bob, Enrico, Ursula

# Application Side-Channel
# --------------------------
# label = <Side Channel>
# ciphertext = <Side Channel>
# policy_encrypting_key = <Side Channel>
# alice_verifying_key = <Side Channel>

# Everyone!
ursula = Ursula.from_seed_and_stake_info(seed_uri='https://0.0.0.0:9151')
alice = Alice.from_public_keys(verifying_key=alice_verifying_key)

> bob = Bob(checksum_address='0xdeadbeef',

Reviewer 3: Similarly to Alice,
```
bob = Bob(checksum_address='0x900A10C9De490487d0516aF58Eb17ea3106B6041', known_nodes=[ursula], network_middleware=RestMiddleware(), registry=registry)
```

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

          provider_uri=<PROVIDER URI>,

>           known_nodes=[ursula])

Reviewer 3: Bob also needs to convert public keys into transportable form:
```python
from nucypher.crypto.powers import DecryptingPower, SigningPower
encryption_key_hex = bob.public_keys(DecryptingPower).hex()
verifying_key_hex = bob.public_keys(SigningPower).hex()
```

Reviewer 3: Of course, Bob needs to be with a learning loop and registry, just like Alice:
```python
bob = Bob(checksum_address='0x900A10C9De490487d0516aF58Eb17ea3106B6041', known_nodes=[ursula], network_middleware=RestMiddleware(), registry=registry)
bob.start_learning_loop()
```
Then `len(bob.known_nodes)` will show something more than 1

enrico = Enrico(policy_encrypting_key=policy_encrypting_key)
```

```python
#
# Decrypt
#

> 

Reviewer 3: Before this, Bob needs to join the policy (to get the treasure map):
```python
bob.join_policy(label=label, alice_verifying_key=alice.public_keys(SigningPower), block=True)
```

Author: Oh I wish this were not the case.

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

cleartext = bob.retrieve(label=label,

>                          message_kit=ciphertext,

Reviewer 3: Indeed, we need the first part of what enrico returns (e.g. the ciphertext), not the whole thing (e.g. a tuple (ciphertext, signature))

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

# NuCypher Quickstart

## A Note about Side Channels

The NuCypher network does not store or handle an application's data; instead - it manages access *to* application data.
Management of encrypted secrets and public keys tends to be highly domain-specific - The surrounding architecture
will vary greatly depending on the throughput, sensitivity, and sharing cadence of application secrets.
In all cases, NuCypher must be integrated with a storage and transport layer in order to function properly.
Along with the transport of ciphertexts, a nucypher application also needs to include channels for Alice and Bob 
to discover each other's public keys, and provide policy encrypting information to Bob and Enrico.
 
##### Side Channel Data:
  - Secrets:
    - Message Kits (Ciphertext)
  - Identities:
    - Alice Verifying Key
    - Bob Encrypting Key
    - Bob Verifying Key
  - Policies:
    - Policy Encrypting Key 
    - Labels

## Running an Ethereum Node

Operation of a decentralized NuCypher character [`Alice`, `Bob`, `Ursula`] requires
a connection to an Ethereum node and wallet.

To run a Goerli-connected Geth node in *fast* syncing mode:

```bash

> $ geth --goerl

Reviewer 3: You, of course, meant `--goerli`, not `goerl`?

Author: Yep! Looks like an accidental.  Note that this PR is WIP and I have not fully responded to outstanding RFCs.

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

```

To run a Goerli-connected Geth node in *light* syncing mode:

```bash
$ geth --goerl --syncmode light
```

Note that using `--syncmode light` is not 100% stable but can be a life savior when using 
a mobile connection (or congested hackathon wifi...).

### Provider URI

Nucypher uses the node's IPC-File to communicate, specified by `provider_uri`.
By default in ubuntu, the path is `~/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc` - This path
will also be logged to the geth-running console on startup. 

Connect to the Geth Console to test your ethereum node's IPC:
```bash
$ geth attach ~/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc
```

### Wallets

To list available accounts on your geth node:

```bash
$ geth attach ~/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc
> eth.accounts
["0x287a817426dd1ae78ea23e9918e2273b6733a43d", "0xc080708026a3a280894365efd51bb64521c45147"]

> ```

Reviewer 3: We probably can also mention that we can create accounts here with `personal.newAccount()`

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

Hardware wallet addresses will also be listed here if one is attached to the system hardware.
Note that the Geth console does not return EIP-55 compliant checksum addresses, and instead will output
the *lowercase* version of the address.  Since Nucypher requires EIP-55 checksum addresses, you will need 
to convert your address to checksum format:

```bash
> web3.toChecksumAddress(eth.accounts[0])
"0x287A817426DD1AE78ea23e9918e2273b6733a43D"
```

## Connecting to The NuCypher Network

### Connecting Nucypher to an Ethereum Provider

```python
from nucypher.blockchain.eth.interfaces import BlockchainInterfaceFactory
BlockchainInterfaceFactory.initialize_interface(provider_uri='~/.ethereum/goerli/geth.ipc')
```

### Ursula: Untrusted Re-Encryption Proxies

When initializing an `Alice`, `Bob`, or `Ursula`, an initial "Stranger-`Ursula`" is needed to perform 
the role of a `Teacher`, or "seednode":

```python
from nucypher.characters.lawful import Ursula, Alice

> ursula = Ursula.from_seed_and_stake_info(seed_uri=<URI>, federated_only=False)  # ie. https://0.0.0.0:9151

Reviewer 3: We can add a link to our status page: any node can be taken from there

another_ursula = Ursula.from_seed_and_stake_info(seed_uri=<URI>, federated_only=False)
```

Stranger `Ursula`s can be created by invoking the `from_seed_and_stake_info` method, then a `list` of `known_nodes`
can be passed into any `Character`'s init. The `known_nodes` will inform your character of all of the nodes
they know about network-wide, then kick-off the automated node-discovery loop:

```python
alice = Alice(known_nodes=[ursula, another_ursula], ...)
```

## Alice: Grant Access to a Secret

```python
from nucypher.characters.lawful import Alice, Bob, Ursula
from nucypher.network.middleware import RestMiddleware
from nucypher.blockchain.eth.registry import InMemoryContractRegistry

> 

Reviewer 3: Should we have a reactor thread?
```python
from twisted.internet import reactor
from threading import Thread
Thread(target=reactor.run, args=(False,)).start()
...
alice.start_learning_loop()
```
Wanna have Alice discovering Ursulas

Author: Still thinking about a graceful way to handle this part of the API.  I do not like the reactor thread on first sight.

# Application Side-Channel
# --------------------------
# bob_encrypting_key = <Side Channel>
# bob_verifying_key = <Side Channel>

ursula = Ursula.from_seed_and_stake_info(seed_uri='https://0.0.0.0:9151', federated_only=False)
alice = Alice(known_nodes=[ursula],
              checksum_address="0x287A817426DD1AE78ea23e9918e2273b6733a43D", 
              registry=InMemoryContractRegistry.from_latest_publication(),
              network_middleware=RestMiddleware())
bob = Bob.from_public_keys(verifying_key=bob_verifying_key, encrypting_key=bob_encrypting_key)
```

```python
from datetime import datetime
import maya

#
# Grant
#

policy_end_datetime = maya.now() + datetime.timedelta(days=5)  # Five days from now

> policy = alice.grant(bob,

Reviewer 3: ```python
policy = alice.grant(bob,
                     label=b'my-secret-stuff',
                     m=2, n=3,
                     expiration=policy_end_datetime,
                     value=10 ** 16 // (5 * 3) * (5 * 3))
```
That's for `n=3`, 5 days and the total price being about `10 ** 16` wei

Author: Not sure if this is a suggestion or....

# Application Side-Channel
# --------------------------
# policy_encrypting_key = <Side Channel>

enrico = Enrico(policy_encrypting_key=policy_encrypting_key)
ciphertext, signature = enrico.encrypt_message(message=b'Peace at dawn.')
```
    
Note that Alice can get the public key even before creating the policy.
From this moment on, any Data Source (Enrico) that knows the public key
can encrypt data originally intended for Alice, but can be shared with
any Bob that Alice grants access.

`policy_pubkey = alice.get_policy_encrypting_key_from_label(label)`

## Bob: Decrypt a Secret

```python
from nucypher.characters.lawful import Alice, Bob, Enrico, Ursula
from nucypher.blockchain.eth.registry import InMemoryContractRegistry
from nucypher.network.middleware import RestMiddleware

# Application Side-Channel
# --------------------------
# label = <Side Channel>
# ciphertext = <Side Channel>
# policy_encrypting_key = <Side Channel>
# alice_verifying_key = <Side Channel>

# Everyone!
ursula = Ursula.from_seed_and_stake_info(seed_uri='https://0.0.0.0:9151', federated_only=False)
alice = Alice.from_public_keys(verifying_key=alice_verifying_key)
bob = Bob(known_nodes=[ursula],

>           checksum_address="0xc080708026a3a280894365efd51bb64521c45147",

Reviewer 3: The address in this example is not a checksum one

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

          registry=InMemoryContractRegistry.from_latest_publication(),

>           network_middleware=RestMiddleware())

Reviewer 3: I think, here we'd also want Bob to start a learning loop, just like Alice (along with the reactor)

Author: Yes I am aware and already saw your suggestions, I am just thinking about the best way to represent this.

# NuCypher Quickstart

## A Note about Side-Channels

> The NuCypher network does not store your applications data; Instead - it manages access *to* your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The NuCypher network does not store your application's data; Instead - it manages access *to* your
```

Author: :heavy_check_mark:

> applications data. Management of encrypted secrets and public keys is highly application-specific - 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
application's data. Management of encrypted secrets and public keys is highly application-specific - 
```

Author: :heavy_check_mark:
